@c Copyright (C) 1996 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Adding New Functions
@chapter Adding New Functions
@cindex Functions

The following is not complete, but should help get you started and
give you some idea about why things are they way they are.

Here's what you need to do to add a new function (I'll use svd() as an
example):

  1. Add the name of the new function to the general_functions list in
     builtins.cc:

       static builtin_general_functions general_functions[] =
       {
	 ...

	 { "svd", 2, 3, builtin_svd,
	   "[U, S, V] = svd (X): return SVD of X\n", },

	 ...
	};

     The builtin_general_functions struct is defined in builtns.h:

       struct builtin_general_functions
       {
	 char *name;
	 int nargin_max;
	 int nargout_max;
	 General_fcn general_fcn;
	 char *help_string;
       };

     name is what the user types (e.g. `svd');

     nargin_max and nargout_max are the maximum number of input and
     output arguments.  These are not really important.  I had
     originally planned to use them to allow Octave to do some
     checking to see if the user had supplied the correct number of
     arguments, but that doesn't really work very well.  It seems
     better to have each function check (since different numbers of
     input arguments may mean different things).

     Note: nargin == 1 means that the function takes no arguments (just
     like C, the first argument is (or should be, anyway) the function
     name).  Also, -1 is shorthand for infinity.

     general_fcn is the function you need to define to do the real
     work.  Usually called builtin_foo, for function foo.  More about
     the form of this function is given below.

     help_string is the message that the user will get if he types
     `help svd'.

     Yes, the initialization of this structure is a bit clumsy.  I'm
     probably going to try to fix that at some point, but don't really
     know exactly how and haven't had time to do it right yet.

  2. Write the function that does all the work.  I've adopted the
     following convention:

       * Declare the function in g-builtins.h.  All `general'
         functions take the same arguments:

           builtin_svd (const tree_constant *args, int nargin, int nargout)

           - args:  a vector of tree_constants, which is the basic
             data structure for values in Octave.  Currently, a
             tree_constant can be a real or complex scalar or matrix,
             a range, or a string.

           - nargin:  the number of arguments the user provided plus
             one.  args[0] is supposed to hold the function name, but
             I'm not sure that that's always true yet.

           - nargout:  the number of arguments the user provided on
             the left side of an assignment, or one if no assignment
             is being done (because of the implicit assignment to ans
             that will occur).

       * Define the function in g-builtins.cc.  Usually, the function
         in g-builtins.cc only contains simple checks to see if the
         correct number of arguments have been supplied and then a
         call to the function that REALLY :-) does all the work.

         If the function is small, it's probably reasonable to define
         it in tc-extras.cc.

         If the function is not small, or if it depends on external
         fortran code, it is probably best to put it in its own file
         (for example, f-svd.cc).  If dynamic linking is ever really
         made to work, it will be important for functions to be
         implemented this way.

         To make it easier to make all of this work in the future,
         calls are written using the DLD_FUNC macro defined at the top
         of g-builtins.cc.  For example:

           DLD_BUILTIN (args, nargin, nargout, svd,
	     retval = svd (args, nargin, nargout);)

         If dynamic linking is being used, this expands to

             return octave_dld_tc2_and_go (args, nargin, nargout, "svd", \
		      "builtin_svd_2", "f-svd.o"));

         which is a call to a function that will take care of patching
         in the function builtin_svd_2, which is defined in the file
         f-svd.cc (corresponding to the object file f-svd.o).

         Otherwise, it simply expands to

           retval = svd (args, nargin, nargout);

         (a function that is also defined in f-svd.cc).

       * If the function is defined in a separate file, like f-svd.cc,
         it should be implemented like the others that already exist.
         The code like

	   #ifdef WITH_DLD
	   tree_constant *
	   builtin_svd_2 (tree_constant *args, int nargin, int nargout)
	   {
	     return svd (args, nargin, nargout);
	   }
	   #endif

         is just a hook for dynamic loading.  It was implemented this
         way so that the names of all the functions that are to be
         loaded dynamically would have consistent form (so that they
         could easily be constructed from the name that the user
         types).

         The rest of the code defined in this file does the real
         work.  In the case of svd, it uses some C++ classes to call
         the required Fortran subroutines.  The class interfaces are
         defined in liboctave/Matrix.h, and the class definitions are
         (for things like SVD, HESS, LU, EIG, etc.) are in
         Matrix-ext.cc.

  3. If you add a new file (like f-svd.cc), don't forget to add it to
     the list of files in Makefile.in, then use configure to update
     the Makefile.


You should use the error reporting functions defined in error.{h,cc}
instead of writing messages directly to cout or cerr.

That way, it will be easier to maintain a consistent look to the
warning and error messages.
