@c Copyright (C) 1996 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Help, Programming Utilities, Command History Functions, Top
@chapter Help

@deffn {Command} help
Octave's @code{help} command can be used to print brief usage-style
messages, or to display information directly from an on-line version of
the printed manual, using the GNU Info browser.  If invoked without any
arguments, @code{help} prints a list of all the available operators,
functions, and built-in variables.  If the first argument is @code{-i},
the @code{help} command searches the index of the on-line version of
this manual for the given topics.

For example, the command

@example
help help
@end example

@noindent
prints a short message describing the @code{help} command, and

@example
help -i help
@end example

@noindent
starts the GNU Info browser at this node in the on-line version of the
manual.

@xref{Using Info}, for complete details about how to use the GNU Info
browser to read the on-line version of the manual.
@end deffn

The help command can give you information about operators, but not the
comma and semicolons that are used as command separators.  To get help
for those, you must type @code{help comma} or @code{help semicolon}.

@defvr {Built-in Variable} INFO_FILE
The variable @code{INFO_FILE} names the location of the Octave info file.
The default value is @code{"@value{OCTAVEHOME}/info/octave.info"}.
@end defvr

@defvr {Built-in Variable} INFO_PROGRAM
The variable @code{INFO_PROGRAM} names the info program to run.  Its
initial value is
@code{@value{OCTAVEHOME}/libexec/octave/VERSION/exec/ARCH/info}, but
that value can be overridden by the environment variable
@code{OCTAVE_INFO_PROGRAM}, or the command line argument
@code{--info-program NAME}, or by setting the value of
@code{INFO_PROGRAM} in a startup script.
@end defvr

@defvr {Built-in Variable} suppress_verbose_help_message
If the value of @code{suppress_verbose_help_message} is nonzero, Octave
will not add additional help information to the end of the output from
the @code{help} command and usage messages for built-in commands.
@end defvr
