@c Copyright (C) 1996, 1997 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@c The text of this file will eventually appear in the file INSTALL
@c in the Octave distribution, as well as in the Octave manual.

@ifclear INSTALLONLY
@node Installation, Emacs, Trouble, Top
@appendix Installing Octave
@end ifclear

@ifset INSTALLONLY
@include conf.texi

This file documents the installation of Octave.

Octave is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation.

@node Installation,  , Installation
@chapter Installing Octave
@end ifset

@cindex installing Octave

Here is the procedure for installing Octave from scratch on a Unix
system.  For instructions on how to install the binary distributions of
Octave, see @ref{Binary Distributions}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Run the shell script @file{configure}.  This will determine the features
your system has (or doesn't have) and create a file named
@file{Makefile} from each of the files named @file{Makefile.in}.

Here is a summary of the configure options that are most frequently used
when building Octave:

@table @code
@item --prefix=@var{prefix}
Install Octave in subdirectories below @var{prefix}.  The default value
of @var{prefix} is @file{/usr/local}.

@item --srcdir=@var{dir}
Look for Octave sources in the directory @var{dir}.

@item --with-f2c
Use @code{f2c} even if a Fortran compiler is available.

@item --with-g77
Use @code{g77} to compile Fortran code.

@item --enable-shared
Create shared libraries.  If you are planning to use
@code{--enable-lite-kernelel} or the dynamic loading features, you will
probably want to use this option.  It will make your @file{.oct} files
much smaller.

You may also want to build a shared version of @code{libg++}, if your
system doesn't already have one.  Note that a patch is needed to build
shared versions of version 2.7.2 of @code{libg++} and @code{libstdc++}
on the HP-PA architecture.  You can find the patch at
@url{ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/g++/libg++-2.7.2-hppa-gcc-fix}.

@item --enable-dl
Use @code{dlopen} and friends to make Octave capable of dynamically
linking externally compiled functions.  This only works on systems that
actually have these functions.  If you plan on using this feature, you
should probably also use @code{--enable-shared} to reduce the size of
your @file{.oct} files.

@item --enable-shl
Use @code{shl_load} and friends to make Octave capable of dynamically
linking externally compiled functions.  This only works on systems that
actually have these functions (only HP-UX systems).  If you plan on
using this feature, you should probably also use @code{--enable-shared}
to reduce the size of your @file{.oct} files.

@item --enable-lite-kernel
Compile smaller kernel.  This currently requires the dynamic linking
functions @code{dlopen} or @code{shl_load} and friends so that Octave
can load functions at run time that are not loaded at compile time.

@item --help
Print a summary of the options recognized by the configure script.
@end table

See the file @file{INSTALL} for more information about the command line
options used by configure.  That file also contains instructions for
compiling in a directory other than where the source is located.

@item
Run make.

You will need a recent version of GNU Make.  Modifying Octave's
makefiles to work with other make programs is probably not worth
your time.  We recommend you get and compile GNU Make instead.

For plotting, you will need to have gnuplot installed on your system.
Gnuplot is a command-driven interactive function plotting program.
Gnuplot is copyrighted, but freely distributable.  The `gnu' in gnuplot
is a coincidence---it is not related to the GNU project or the FSF in
any but the most peripheral sense.

For version @value{VERSION}, you must have the GNU C++ compiler
(@code{gcc}) version 2.7.2 or later to compile Octave.  You will also
need version 2.7.1 or 2.7.2 of the GNU C++ class library
(@code{libg++}).  If you plan to modify the parser you will also need
GNU @code{bison} and @code{flex}.  If you modify the documentation, you
will need GNU Texinfo, along with the patch for the @code{makeinfo}
program that is distributed with Octave.

GNU Make, @code{gcc}, and @code{libg++}, @code{gnuplot}, @code{bison},
@code{flex}, and Texinfo are all available from many anonymous ftp
archives.  The primary site is @url{prep.ai.mit.edu}, but it is often
very busy.  A list of sites that mirror the software on @code{prep} is
available by anonymous ftp from
@url{ftp://prep.ai.mit.edu/pub/gnu/GNUinfo/FTP}, or by fingering 
@email{fsf@@prep.ai.mit.edu}.

If you don't have a Fortran compiler, or if your Fortran compiler
doesn't work like the traditional Unix f77, you will need to have the
Fortran to C translator @code{f2c}.  You can get @code{f2c} from any
number of anonymous ftp archives.  The most recent version of @code{f2c}
is always available from @url{netlib.att.com}.

On an otherwise idle Pentium 133 running Linux, it will take somewhere
between 1-1/2 to 3 hours to compile everything, depending on whether you
are building shared libraries.  You will need about 100 megabytes of disk
storage to work with (considerably less if you don't compile with debugging
symbols).  To do that, use the command

@example
make CFLAGS=-O CXXFLAGS=-O LDFLAGS=
@end example

@noindent
instead of just @samp{make}.

@item
If you encounter errors while compiling Octave, first check the list of
known problems below to see if there is a workaround or solution for
your problem.  If not,
@ifclear INSTALLONLY
see @ref{Trouble},
@end ifclear
@ifset INSTALLONLY
see the file BUGS
@end ifset
for information about how to report bugs.

@item
Once you have successfully compiled Octave, run @samp{make install}.

This will install a copy of octave, its libraries, and its documentation
in the destination directory.  As distributed, Octave is installed in
the following directories.  In the table below, @var{prefix} defaults to
@file{/usr/local}, @var{version} stands for the current version number
of the interpreter, and @var{host_type} is the type of computer on which
Octave is installed (for example, @samp{i586-unknown-gnu}).

@table @file
@item @var{prefix}/bin
Octave and other binaries that people will want to run directly.

@item @var{prefix}/lib
Libraries like libcruft.a and liboctave.a.

@item @var{prefix}/share
Architecture-independent data files.

@item @var{prefix}/include/octave
Include files distributed with Octave.

@item @var{prefix}/man/man1
Unix-style man pages describing Octave.

@item @var{prefix}/info
Info files describing Octave.

@item @var{prefix}/share/octave/@var{version}/m
Function files distributed with Octave.  This includes the Octave
version, so that multiple versions of Octave may be installed at the
same time.

@item @var{prefix}/lib/octave/@var{version}/exec/@var{host_type}
Executables to be run by Octave rather than the user.

@item @var{prefix}/lib/octave/@var{version}/oct/@var{host_type}
Object files that will be dynamically loaded.

@item @var{prefix}/share/octave/@var{version}/imagelib
Image files that are distributed with Octave.
@end table
@end itemize

@menu
* Notes::                       
* Installation Problems::       
* Binary Distributions::        
@end menu

@node Notes, Installation Problems, Installation, Installation
@appendixsec Notes

@itemize @bullet
@item
You must use the version of GNU Info distributed with Octave, because it
includes some changes to allow Octave to search the indices of the info
files.  If you would like, you should be able to replace other copies of
the Info browser that you have with the one distributed with Octave.
Patches relative to a recent release of the GNU Info browser are
included in the file @file{INFO.PATCH} in the Octave source
distribution.  This modification has been submitted to the GNU Info
maintainer, and should appear in some future release.  Once that
happens, the GNU Info browser will no longer be distributed with Octave.
@end itemize

@node Installation Problems, Binary Distributions, Notes, Installation
@appendixsec Installation Problems

This section contains a list of problems (and some apparent problems
that don't really mean anything is wrong) that may show up during
installation of Octave.

@itemize @bullet
@item
On some SCO systems, @code{info} fails to compile if
@code{HAVE_TERMIOS_H} is defined int @file{config.h}.  Simply removing
the definition from @file{info/config.h} should allow it to compile.

@item
If @code{configure} finds @code{dlopen}, @code{dlsym}, @code{dlclose},
and @code{dlerror}, but not the header file @file{dlfcn.h}, you need to
find the source for the header file and install it in the directory
@file{usr/include}.  This is reportedly a problem with Slackware 3.1.
For Linux/GNU systems, the source for @file{dlfcn.h} is in the
@code{ldso} package.

@item
Building @file{.oct} files doesn't work.

You should probably have a shared version of @code{libg++}.  A patch is
needed to build shared versions of version 2.7.2 of @code{libg++} and
@code{libstdc++} on the HP-PA architecture.  You can find the patch at
@url{ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/g++/libg++-2.7.2-hppa-gcc-fix}.

@item
If you encounter errors like

@smallexample
@group
passing `void (*)()' as argument 2 of
  `octave_set_signal_handler(int, void (*)(int))'
@end group
@end smallexample

@noindent
or

@smallexample
warning: ANSI C++ prohibits conversion from `(int)' to `(...)'
@end smallexample

@noindent
while compiling @file{sighandlers.cc}, you may need to edit some files
in the @code{gcc} include subdirectory to add proper prototypes for functions
there.  For example, Ultrix 4.2 needs proper declarations for the
@code{signal} function and the @code{SIG_IGN} macro in the file
@file{signal.h}.

On some systems the @code{SIG_IGN} macro is defined to be something like
this:

@example
#define  SIG_IGN  (void (*)())1
@end example

@noindent
when it should really be something like:

@example
#define  SIG_IGN  (void (*)(int))1
@end example

@noindent
to match the prototype declaration for the @code{signal} function.  This
change should also be made for the @code{SIG_DFL} and @code{SIG_ERR}
symbols. It may be necessary to change the definitions in
@file{sys/signal.h} as well.

The @code{gcc} @code{fixincludes} and @code{fixproto} scripts should
probably fix these problems when @code{gcc} installs its modified set of
header files, but I don't think that's been done yet.

@strong{You should not change the files in @file{/usr/include}}.  You
can find the @code{gcc} include directory tree by running the command

@example
gcc -print-libgcc-file-name
@end example

@noindent
The directory of @code{gcc} include files normally begins in the same directory
that contains the file @file{libgcc.a}.

@item
There is a bug with the @code{makeinfo} program that is distributed with
Texinfo (through version 3.9) that causes the indices in Octave's
on-line manual to be generated incorrectly.  If you need to recreate the
on-line documentation, you should get the @code{makeinfo} program that
is distributed with texinfo-3.9 and apply the patch for @code{makeinfo}
that is distributed with Octave.  See the file @file{MAKEINFO.PATCH} for
more details.

@item
Some of the Fortran subroutines may fail to compile with older versions
of the Sun Fortran compiler.  If you get errors like

@smallexample
zgemm.f:
	zgemm:
warning: unexpected parent of complex expression subtree
zgemm.f, line 245: warning: unexpected parent of complex
  expression subtree
warning: unexpected parent of complex expression subtree
zgemm.f, line 304: warning: unexpected parent of complex
  expression subtree
warning: unexpected parent of complex expression subtree
zgemm.f, line 327: warning: unexpected parent of complex
  expression subtree
pcc_binval: missing IR_CONV in complex op
make[2]: *** [zgemm.o] Error 1
@end smallexample

@noindent
when compiling the Fortran subroutines in the @file{libcruft}
subdirectory, you should either upgrade your compiler or try compiling
with optimization turned off.

@item
On NeXT systems, if you get errors like this:

@example
/usr/tmp/cc007458.s:unknown:Undefined local symbol LBB7656
/usr/tmp/cc007458.s:unknown:Undefined local symbol LBE7656
@end example

@noindent
when compiling @file{Array.cc} and @file{Matrix.cc}, try recompiling
these files without @code{-g}.

@item
Some people have reported that calls to shell_cmd and the pager do not
work on SunOS systems.  This is apparently due to having
@code{G_HAVE_SYS_WAIT} defined to be 0 instead of 1 when compiling
@code{libg++}.

@item
On NeXT systems, linking to @file{libsys_s.a} may fail to resolve the
following functions

@example
_tcgetattr
_tcsetattr
_tcflow
@end example

@noindent
which are part of @file{libposix.a}.  Unfortunately, linking Octave with
@code{-posix} results in the following undefined symbols.

@example
.destructors_used
.constructors_used
_objc_msgSend
_NXGetDefaultValue
_NXRegisterDefaults
.objc_class_name_NXStringTable
.objc_class_name_NXBundle
@end example

One kluge around this problem is to extract @file{termios.o} from
@file{libposix.a}, put it in Octave's @file{src} directory, and add it
to the list of files to link together in the makefile.  Suggestions for
better ways to solve this problem are welcome!

@item
If Octave crashes immediately with a floating point exception, it is
likely that it is failing to initialize the IEEE floating point values
for infinity and NaN.

If your system actually does support IEEE arithmetic, you should be able
to fix this problem by modifying the function @code{octave_ieee_init} in
the file @file{lo-ieee.cc} to correctly initialize Octave's internal
infinity and NaN variables.

If your system does not support IEEE arithmetic but Octave's configure
script incorrectly determined that it does, you can work around the
problem by editing the file @file{config.h} to not define
@code{HAVE_ISINF}, @code{HAVE_FINITE}, and @code{HAVE_ISNAN}.

In any case, please report this as a bug since it might be possible to
modify Octave's configuration script to automatically determine the
proper thing to do.

@item
If you don't have @sc{Npsol} but you still want to be able to solve
NLPs, or if you don't have @sc{Qpsol} but you still want to solve QPs,
you'll need to find replacements or order them from Stanford.  If you
know of a freely redistributable replacement, please let us know---we
might be interested in distributing it with Octave.

You can get more information about @sc{Npsol} and @sc{Qpsol} from

@quotation
Stanford Business Sofrtware, Inc.@*
2680 Bayshore Parkway, Suite 304@*
Mountain View, CA 94043@*
Tel: (415) 962-8719@*
Fax: (415) 962-1869
@end quotation

Octave may soon support @sc{Fsqp}, an NLP solver from Andre Tits
@email{andre@@src.umd.edu} of the University of Maryland.  @sc{Fsqp} is
available free of charge to academic sites, but can not be redistributed
to third parties.
@end itemize

@node Binary Distributions,  , Installation Problems, Installation
@appendixsec Binary Distributions

Although Octave is not very difficult to build from its sources, it is a
relatively large program that does require a significant amount of time
and disk space to compile and install.  Because of this, many people
want to be able to obtain binary distributions so they can start using
Octave immediately, without having to bother with the details of
compiling it first.  This is understandable, so I try to maintain a
current collection of binary distributions at
@url{ftp://ftp.che.wisc.edu/pub/octave/BINARIES}.

Please understand, however, that there is only a limited amount of time
available to devote to making binaries, so binaries may not be
immediately available for some platforms.  (Please contact
@email{bug-octave@@bevo.che.wisc.edu} if you are interested in helping
make a binary distribution available for your system.)

Also, binary distributions are limited to static binaries that do not
support dynamic linking.  For earlier versions of Octave, I tried
distributing dynamically linked binaries but that proved to be too much
trouble to support.  If you want to have a copy of Octave that includes
all the features described in this manual, you will have to build it
from the sources yourself, or find someone else who is willing to do it
for you.

@menu
* Installing Octave from a Binary Distribution::  
* Creating a Binary Distribution::  
@end menu

@node Installing Octave from a Binary Distribution, Creating a Binary Distribution, Binary Distributions, Binary Distributions
@appendixsubsec Installing Octave from a Binary Distribution

To install Octave from a binary distribution, execute the command

@example
sh ./install-octave
@end example

@noindent
in the top level directory of the distribution.

Binary distributions are normally compiled assuming that Octave will be
installed in the following subdirectories of @file{/usr/local}.

@table @file
@item bin
Octave and other binaries that people will want to run directly.

@item lib
Shared libraries that Octave needs in order to run.  These files are
not included if you are installing a statically linked version of
Octave.

@item man/man1
Unix-style man pages describing Octave.

@item info
Info files describing Octave.

@item share/octave/@var{version}/m
Function files distributed with Octave.  This includes the Octave
version, so that multiple versions of Octave may be installed at the
same time.

@item libexec/octave/@var{version}/exec/@var{host_type}
Executables to be run by Octave rather than the user.

@item libexec/octave/@var{version}/oct/@var{host_type}
Object files that will be dynamically loaded.

@item share/octave/@var{version}/imagelib
Image files that are distributed with Octave.
@end table

@noindent
where @var{version} stands for the current version number of the
interpreter, and @var{host_type} is the type of computer on which Octave
is installed (for example, @samp{@value{TARGETHOSTTYPE}}).

If these directories don't exist, the script @code{install-octave} will
create them for you.  The installation script also creates the following
subdirectories of @file{/usr/local} that are intended for locally
installed functions:

@table @file
@item share/octave/site/m
Locally installed M-files.

@item libexec/octave/site/exec/@var{host_type}
Locally installed binaries intended to be run by Octave rather than by
the user.

@item libexec/octave/site/octave/@var{host_type}
Local object files that will be dynamically linked.
@end table

If it is not possible for you to install Octave in @file{/usr/local}, or
if you would prefer to install it in a different directory, you can
specify the name of the top level directory as an argument to the
@file{install-octave} script.  For example:

@example
sh ./install-octave /some/other/directory
@end example

@noindent
will install Octave in subdirectories of the directory
@file{/some/other/directory}.

@node Creating a Binary Distribution,  , Installing Octave from a Binary Distribution, Binary Distributions
@appendixsubsec Creating a Binary Distribution

Here is how to build a binary distribution for others to use.  If you
want to make a binary distribution for your system available along with
the Octave sources and binaries on @url{ftp.che.wisc.edu}, please follow
this procedure.  For directions explaining how to make the binary
available on the ftp site, please contact
@email{bug-octave@@bevo.che.wisc.edu}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Unpack the source distribution:

@example
gunzip -c octave-@value{VERSION}.tar.gz | tar xf -
@end example

@item
Change your current directory to the top-level directory of the source
distribution:

@example
cd octave-@value{VERSION}
@end example

@item
Make the binary distribution:

@example
make binary-dist
@end example

This will create a compressed tar file ready for distribution.
It will contain statically linked binaries and have a name like
@file{octave-@value{VERSION}-@value{TARGETHOSTTYPE}.tar.gz}
@end itemize
