@c Copyright (C) 1996 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Invoking Octave, Expressions, Introduction, Top
@chapter Invoking Octave

Normally, Octave is used interactively by running the program
@samp{octave} without any arguments.  Once started, Octave reads
commands from the terminal until you tell it to exit.

You can also specify the name of a file on the command line, and Octave
will read and execute the commands from the named file and then exit
when it is finished.

You can further control how Octave starts up by using the command-line
options described in the next section, and Octave itself can remind you
of the options available.  Type

@example
octave --help
@end example

@noindent
to display all available options and briefly describe their use
(@samp{octave -h} is a shorter equivalent).

@menu
* Command Line Options::        
* Startup Files::               
@end menu

@node Command Line Options, Startup Files, Invoking Octave, Invoking Octave
@section Command Line Options
@cindex Octave command options
@cindex command options
@cindex options, Octave command

@table @code
@item --debug
@itemx -d
@cindex @code{--debug}
@cindex @code{-d}
Enter parser debugging mode.  Using this option will cause Octave's
parser to print a lot of information about the commands it reads, and is
probably only useful if you are actually trying to debug the parser.

@item --echo-commands
@itemx -x
@cindex @code{--echo-commands}
@cindex @code{-x}
Echo commands as they are executed.

@item --exec-path @var{path}
@cindex @code{--exec-path @var{path}}
Specify the path to search for programs to run.  The value of @var{path}
specified on the command line will override any value of
@samp{OCTAVE_EXEC_PATH} found in the environment, but not any 
@samp{EXEC_PATH = "path"} commands found in the system or user startup
files.

@item --help
@itemx -h
@itemx -?
@cindex @code{--help}
@cindex @code{-h}
@cindex @code{-?}
Print short help message and exit.

@item --info-file @var{filename}
@cindex @code{--info-file @var{filename}}
Specify the name of the info file to use.  The value of @var{filename}
specified on the command line will override any value of
@samp{OCTAVE_INFO_FILE} found in the environment, but not any
@samp{INFO_FILE = "filename"} commands found in the system or user
startup files.

@item --info-program @var{program}
@cindex @code{--info-program @var{program}}
Specify the name of the info program to use.  The value of @var{program}
specified on the command line will override any value of
@samp{OCTAVE_INFO_PROGRAM} found in the environment, but not any
@samp{INFO_PROGRAM = "program"} commands found in the system or user
startup files.

@item --interactive
@itemx -i
@cindex @code{--interactive}
@cindex @code{-i}
Force interactive behavior.

@item --no-init-file
@cindex @code{--no-init-file}
Don't read the @file{~/.octaverc} or @file{.octaverc} files.

@item --no-line-editing
@cindex @code{--no-line-editing}
Disable command-line editing and history.

@item --no-site-file
@cindex @code{--no-site-file}
Don't read the site-wide @file{octaverc} file.

@item --norc
@itemx -f
@cindex @code{--norc}
@cindex @code{-f}
Don't read any of the system or user initialization files at startup.
This is equivalent to using both of the options @code{--no-init-file}
and @code{--no-site-file}.

@item --path @var{path}
@itemx -p @var{path}
@cindex @code{--path @var{path}}
@cindex @code{-p @var{path}}
Specify the path to search for function files.  The value of @var{path}
specified on the command line will override any value of
@samp{OCTAVE_PATH} found in the environment, but not any
@samp{LOADPATH = "path"} commands found in the system or user startup
files.

@item --silent
@itemx --quiet
@itemx -q
@cindex @code{--silent}
@cindex @code{--quiet}
@cindex @code{-q}
Don't print message at startup.

@item --traditional
@itemx --braindead
@cindex @code{--traditional}
@cindex @code{--braindead}
Set initial values for user-preference variables to the following
values for compatibility with @sc{Matlab}.

@example
PS1                           = ">> "
PS2                           = ""
beep_on_error                 = 1
default_save_format           = "mat-binary"
define_all_return_values      = 1
do_fortran_indexing           = 1
empty_list_elements_ok        = 1
implicit_str_to_num_ok        = 1
ok_to_lose_imaginary_part     = 1
page_screen_output            = 0
prefer_column_vectors         = 0
prefer_zero_one_indexing      = 1
print_empty_dimensions        = 0
treat_neg_dim_as_zero         = 1
warn_function_name_clash      = 0
whitespace_in_literal_matrix  = "traditional"
@end example

@item --verbose
@itemx -V
@cindex @code{--verbose}
@cindex @code{-V}
Turn on verbose output.

@item --version
@itemx -v
@cindex @code{--version}
@cindex @code{-v}
Print the program version number and exit.

@item @var{file}
Execute commands from @var{file}.
@end table

@defvr {Built-in Variable} argv
The command line arguments passed to Octave are available in this
variable.  For example, if you invoked Octave using the command

@example
octave --no-line-editing --silent
@end example

@noindent
@code{argv} would be a string vector with the elements
@code{--no-line-editing} and @code{--silent}.
@end defvr

@defvr {Built-in Variable} nargin
At the top level, this variable is defined as the number of command line
arguments that were passed to Octave.
@end defvr

@defvr {Built-in Variable} program_invocation_name
@defvrx {Built-in Variable} program_name
When Octave starts, the value of @code{program_invocation_name} is
automatically set to the name that was typed at the shell prompt to run
Octave, and the value of @code{program_name} is automatically set to the
final component of @code{program_invocation_name}.  For example, if you
typed @file{@value{OCTAVEHOME}/bin/octave} to start Octave,
@code{program_invocation_name} would have the value
@file{@value{OCTAVEHOME}/bin/octave}, and @code{program_name} would have the
value @code{octave}.

If executing a script from the command line (e.g., @code{octave foo.m}
or using an executable Octave script, the program name is set to the
name of the script.  @xref{Executable Octave Programs} for an example of
how to create an executable Octave script.
@end defvr

Here is an example of using these variables to reproduce Octave's
command line.

@example
printf ("%s", program_name);
for i = 1:nargin
  printf (" %s", i, argv(i,:));
endfor
printf ("\n");
@end example

@noindent
@xref{Index Expressions} for an explanation of how to properly index
arrays of strings and substrings in Octave.

@node Startup Files,  , Command Line Options, Invoking Octave
@section Startup Files
@cindex initialization
@cindex startup

When Octave starts, it looks for commands to execute from the following
files:

@cindex startup files

@table @code
@item OCTAVE_HOME/share/octave/site/m/startup/octaverc
Where @code{OCTAVE_HOME} is the directory in which all of Octave is
installed (the default is @file{/usr/local}).  This file is provided so
that changes to the default Octave environment can be made globally for
all users at your site for all versions of Octave you have installed.
Some care should be taken when making changes to this file, since all
users of Octave at your site will be affected.

@item OCTAVE_HOME/share/octave/VERSION/m/startup/octaverc
Where @code{OCTAVE_HOME} is the directory in which all of Octave is
installed (the default is @file{/usr/local}), and @code{VERSION} is the
version number of Octave.  This file is provided so that changes to the
default Octave environment can be made globally for all users for a
particular version of Octave.  Some care should be taken when making
changes to this file, since all users of Octave at your site will be
affected.

@item ~/.octaverc
@cindex @code{~/.octaverc}
This file is normally used to make personal changes to the default
Octave environment.

@item .octaverc
@cindex @code{.octaverc}
This file can be used to make changes to the default Octave environment
for a particular project.  Octave searches for this file in the current
directory after it reads @file{~/.octaverc}.  Any use of the @code{cd}
command in the @file{~/.octaverc} file will affect the directory that
Octave searches for the file @file{.octaverc}.

If you start Octave in your home directory, commands from from the file
@file{~/.octaverc} will only be executed once.
@end table

A message will be displayed as each of the startup files is read if you
invoke Octave with the @code{--verbose} option but without the
@code{--silent} option.

Startup files may contain any valid Octave commands, including multiple
function definitions.
