.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2023 The Octave Project Developers
.\"
.\" See the file COPYRIGHT.md in the top-level directory of this
.\" or <https://octave.org/copyright/>.
.\"
.\" This file is part of Octave.
.\"
.\" Octave is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Octave is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with Octave; see the file COPYING.  If not, see
.\" <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.de Vb \" (V)erbatim (b)egin.  Use fixed width font and no justification
.ft CW
.nf
..
.de Ve \" (V)erbatim (e)nd.  Return to regular font and justification
.ft R
.fi
..
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH MKOCTFILE 1 "3 January 2014" "GNU Octave"
.SH NAME
mkoctfile \- Compile dynamic-load modules for GNU Octave
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmkoctfile\fP [\fIOPTION\fP]... file...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmkoctfile\fP is used to compile C, C++, or Fortran source code in
to a dynamically loadable \fI.oct\fP file for
.BR octave (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-?\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
Print help message.
.TP
.B \-I\fIdir\fP
Add include directory \fIdir\fP to compile commands.
.TP
.B \-idirafter\fIdir\fP
Add include directory to second include search path after '\fB\-I\fP'.
.TP
.B \-D\fIdef\fP
Add definition \fIdef\fP to compiler command.
.TP
.B \-l\fIlib\fP
Add library \fIlib\fP to link command.
.TP
.B \-L\fIdir\fP
Add library directory \fIdir\fP to link command.
.TP
.B \-R\fIdir\fP
Pass \fB\-R\fP\fIdir\fP to link command.
.TP
.B \-g
Enable debugging option for all compilers.
.TP
.B \-pthread
Add \fB\-pthread\fP to link command.
.TP
.B \-W...
Pass flags to the compiler such as \fB\-Wa,\fP\fIOPTION\fP.
.TP
.B \-Wl,...
Pass flags to the linker such as \fB\-Wl,\-rpath=...\fP
.TP
.B \-M\fR,\fB \-\-depend
Generate dependency files (.d) for C and C++ source files.
.TP
.B \-c
Compile but do not link.
.TP
.B \-\-link\-stand\-alone
Link a stand-alone executable file.
.TP
.B \-s\fR,\fB \-\-strip
Strip the output file.
.TP
.B \-\-mex
Create a MEX file.  Set the default output extension to \fB.mex\fP.
.TP
.B \-o \fIfile\fP\fR,\fB \-\-output \fIfile\fP
Output filename.  Default extension is \fB.oct\fP (or \fB.mex\fP if \-\-mex is
specified) unless linking a stand-alone executable.
.TP
.B \-p \fIVAR\fP\fR,\fB \-\-print \fIVAR\fP
Print configuration variable \fIVAR\fP.  There are three categories of
variables:
.IP
Octave configuration variables that users may override with environment
variables.  These are used in commands that mkoctfile executes.
.RS
.Vb
    ALL_CFLAGS                  INCLUDEDIR
    ALL_CXXFLAGS                LAPACK_LIBS
    ALL_FFLAGS                  LDFLAGS
    ALL_LDFLAGS                 LD_STATIC_FLAG
    BLAS_LIBS                   LFLAGS
    CC                          LIBDIR
    CFLAGS                      LIBOCTAVE
    CPICFLAG                    LIBOCTINTERP
    CPPFLAGS                    OCTAVE_LINK_OPTS
    CXX                         OCTINCLUDEDIR
    CXXFLAGS                    OCTAVE_LIBS
    CXXLD                       OCTAVE_LINK_DEPS
    CXXPICFLAG                  OCTLIBDIR
    DL_LDFLAGS                  OCT_LINK_DEPS
    F77                         OCT_LINK_OPTS
    F77_INTEGER8_FLAG           RDYNAMIC_FLAG
    FFLAGS                      SPECIAL_MATH_LIB
    FPICFLAG                    XTRA_CFLAGS
    INCFLAGS                    XTRA_CXXFLAGS
.Ve
.RE
.IP
Octave configuration variables as above, but currently unused by mkoctfile.
.RS
.Vb
    AR
    DEPEND_EXTRA_SED_PATTERN
    DEPEND_FLAGS
    FFTW3F_LDFLAGS
    FFTW3F_LIBS
    FFTW3_LDFLAGS
    FFTW3_LIBS
    FFTW_LIBS
    FLIBS
    LIBS
    RANLIB
    READLINE_LIBS
.Ve
.RE
.IP
Octave configuration variables that are provided for informational purposes
only.  Except for OCTAVE_HOME and OCTAVE_EXEC_HOME, users may not override
these variables.
.IP
If OCTAVE_HOME or OCTAVE_EXEC_HOME are set in the environment, then other
variables are adjusted accordingly with OCTAVE_HOME or OCTAVE_EXEC_HOME
substituted for the original value of the directory specified by the
\-\-prefix or \-\-exec\-prefix options that were used when Octave was
configured.
.RS
.Vb
    API_VERSION                 LOCALFCNFILEDIR
    ARCHLIBDIR                  LOCALOCTFILEDIR
    BINDIR                      LOCALSTARTUPFILEDIR
    CANONICAL_HOST_TYPE         LOCALVERARCHLIBDIR
    DATADIR                     LOCALVERFCNFILEDIR
    DATAROOTDIR                 LOCALVEROCTFILEDIR
    DEFAULT_PAGER               MAN1DIR
    EXEC_PREFIX                 MAN1EXT
    EXEEXT                      MANDIR
    FCNFILEDIR                  OCTAVE_EXEC_HOME
    IMAGEDIR                    OCTAVE_HOME
    INFODIR                     OCTAVE_VERSION
    INFOFILE                    OCTDATADIR
    LIBEXECDIR                  OCTDOCDIR
    LOCALAPIARCHLIBDIR          OCTFILEDIR
    LOCALAPIFCNFILEDIR          OCTFONTSDIR
    LOCALAPIOCTFILEDIR          STARTUPFILEDIR
    LOCALARCHLIBDIR
.Ve
.RE
.TP
.B \-v\fR,\fB \-\-verbose
Echo commands as they are executed.
.TP
.B file
Compile or link file.  Recognized file types are:
.RS
.Vb
   .c    C source
   .cc   C++ source
   .cp   C++ source
   .cpp  C++ source
   .CPP  C++ source
   .cxx  C++ source
   .c++  C++ source
   .C    C++ source
   .f    Fortran source (fixed form)
   .F    Fortran source (fixed form)
   .f90  Fortran source (free form)
   .F90  Fortran source (free form)
   .o    object file
   .a    library file
.Ve
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
John W. Eaton <jwe@octave.org>

This manual page was contributed by Dirk Eddelbuettel
<edd@debian.org> for the Debian GNU/Linux distribution but
may be used by others.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
octave (1).
