.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2011 Dirk Eddelbuettel
.\"
.\" This file is part of Octave.
.\"
.\" Octave is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
.\" Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at
.\" your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Octave is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with Octave; see the file COPYING.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" This page was contributed by Dirk Eddelbuettel <edd@debian.org>
.\" 
.TH octave-bug 1 "6 March 2000" GNU
.SH NAME
octave-bug \- report a bug in GNU Octave
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B octave-bug
.RB [\| \-s
.IR subject \|]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B octave-bug
is a shell script to help the user compose and mail bug reports
concerning Octave in a standard format.  
.B octave-bug
is typically invoked by the Octave command
.B bug_report
which is intended to be called interactively from within Octave. This
provides the best way to submit a bug report for Octave. It creates a
template bug report file and starts an editor on that file.  The bug report
will be sent to the bug-octave mailing list once the editing has been
completed (this assumes of course that your system can use email). However,
the user could also call \fBoctave-bug\fR outside of Octave.
.PP
Please read the `Bugs' chapter in the Octave manual to find out how to submit
a bug report that will enable the Octave maintainers to fix the problem.  If
you are unable to use the bug_report command, send your message to the
bug-octave mailing list, bug@octave.org.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -s\  subject
Specify a subject line for the bug report.  Spaces in the subject must
be quoted.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.B 
octave-bug 
uses the environment variables
.BR USER, 
.BR EDITOR, 
and 
.B PAGER 
which can be used for customization.
.SH VERSION
This document was last revised for Octave version 2.0.16.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR octave (1),
.BR bashbug (1)     
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
John W. Eaton
<jwe@octave.org>
