@c Copyright (C) 1996 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Programming Utilities, Amusements, Help, Top
@chapter Programming Utilities

@menu
* Evaluating Strings as Commands::  
* Miscellaneous Utilities::     
@end menu

@node Evaluating Strings as Commands, Miscellaneous Utilities, Programming Utilities, Programming Utilities
@section Evaluating Strings as Commands

It is often useful to evaluate a string as if it were an Octave program,
or use a string as the name of a function to call.  These functions are
necessary in order to evaluate commands that are not known until run
time, or to write functions that will need to call user-supplied
functions.

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} eval (@var{command})
Parse the string @var{command} and evaluate it as if it were an Octave
program, returning the last value computed.  The @var{command} is
evaluated in the current context, so any results remain available after
@code{eval} returns.  For example,

@example
octave:13> a
error: `a' undefined
octave:14> eval ("a = 13")
a = 13
ans = 13
octave:15> a
a = 13
@end example

In this case, two values are printed:  one for the expression that was
evaluated, and one for the value returned from @code{eval}.  Just as
with any other expression, you can turn printing off by ending the
expression in a semicolon.  For example,

@example
octave:13> a
error: `a' undefined
octave:14> eval ("a = 13;")
ans = 13
octave:15> a
a = 13
@end example
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} feval (@var{name}, @dots{})
Evaluate the function named @var{name}.  Any arguments after the first
are passed on to the named function.  For example,

@example
octave:12> feval ("acos", -1)
ans = 3.1416
@end example

@noindent
calls the function @code{acos} with the argument @samp{-1}.

The function @code{feval} is necessary in order to be able to write
functions that call user-supplied functions, because Octave does not
have a way to declare a pointer to a function (like C) or to declare a
special kind of variable that can be used to hold the name of a function
(like @code{EXTERNAL} in Fortran).  Instead, you must refer to functions
by name, and use @code{feval} to call them.
@end deftypefn

@cindex Fordyce, A. P.
@findex newtroot
Here is a simple-minded function using @code{feval} that finds the root
of a user-supplied function of one variable.

@example
@group
function result = newtroot (fname, x)

# usage: newtroot (fname, x)
#
#   fname : a string naming a function f(x).
#   x     : initial guess

  delta = tol = sqrt (eps);
  maxit = 200;
  fx = feval (fname, x);
  for i = 1:maxit
    if (abs (fx) < tol)
      result = x;
      return;
    else
      fx_new = feval (fname, x + delta);
      deriv = (fx_new - fx) / delta;
      x = x - fx / deriv;
      fx = fx_new;
    endif
  endfor

  result = x;

endfunction
@end group
@end example

Note that this is only meant to be an example of calling user-supplied
functions and should not be taken too seriously.  In addition to using a
more robust algorithm, any serious code would check the number and type
of all the arguments, ensure that the supplied function really was a
function, etc.

@node Miscellaneous Utilities,  , Evaluating Strings as Commands, Programming Utilities
@section Miscellaneous Utilities

The following functions allow you to determine the size of a variable or
expression, find out whether a variable exists, print error messages, or
delete variable names from the symbol table.

@deftypefn {Function File} {} columns (@var{a})
Return the number of columns of @var{a}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} rows (@var{a})
Return the number of rows of @var{a}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} length (@var{a})
Return the number of rows of @var{a} or the number of columns of
@var{a}, whichever is larger.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} size (@var{a}, @var{n})
Return the number rows and columns of @var{a}.

With one input argument and one output argument, the result is returned
in a 2 element row vector.  If there are two output arguments, the
number of rows is assigned to the first, and the number of columns to
the second.  For example,

@example
@group
octave:13> size ([1, 2; 3, 4; 5, 6])
ans =

  3  2

octave:14> [nr, nc] = size ([1, 2; 3, 4; 5, 6])
nr = 3

nc = 2
@end group
@end example

If given a second argument of either 1 or 2, @code{size} will return
only the row or column dimension.  For example

@example
octave:15> size ([1, 2; 3, 4; 5, 6], 2)
ans = 2
@end example

@noindent
returns the number of columns in the given matrix.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} is_global (@var{a})
Return 1 if @var{a} is globally visible.  Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} is_matrix (@var{a})
Return 1 if @var{a} is a matrix.  Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} is_vector (@var{a})
Return 1 if @var{a} is a vector.  Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} is_scalar (@var{a})
Return 1 if @var{a} is a scalar.  Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} is_square (@var{x})
If @var{x} is a square matrix, then return the dimension of @var{x}.
Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} is_symmetric (@var{x}, @var{tol})
If @var{x} is symmetric within the tolerance specified by @var{tol}, 
then return the dimension of @var{x}.  Otherwise, return 0.  If
@var{tol} is omitted, use a tolerance equal to the machine precision.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} isstr (@var{a})
Return 1 if @var{a} is a string.  Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} isempty (@var{a})
Return 1 if @var{a} is an empty matrix (either the number of rows, or
the number of columns, or both are zero).  Otherwise, return 0.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Command} clear pattern @dots{}
Delete the names matching the given patterns from the symbol table.  The
pattern may contain the following special characters:
@table @code
@item ?
Match any single character.

@item *
Match zero or more characters.

@item [ @var{list} ]
Match the list of characters specified by @var{list}.  If the first
character is @code{!} or @code{^}, match all characters except those
specified by @var{list}.  For example, the pattern @samp{[a-zA-Z]} will
match all lower and upper case alphabetic characters. 
@end table

For example, the command

@example
clear foo b*r
@end example

@noindent
clears the name @code{foo} and all names that begin with the letter
@code{b} and end with the letter @code{r}.

If @code{clear} is called without any arguments, all user-defined
variables (local and global) are cleared from the symbol table.  If
@code{clear} is called with at least one argument, only the visible
names matching the arguments are cleared.  For example, suppose you have
defined a function @code{foo}, and then hidden it by performing the
assignment @code{foo = 2}.  Executing the command @samp{clear foo} once
will clear the variable definition and restore the definition of
@code{foo} as a function.  Executing @samp{clear foo} a second time will
clear the function definition.

This command may not be used within a function body.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} who options pattern @dots{}
@deffnx {Command} whos options pattern @dots{}
List currently defined symbols matching the given patterns.  The
following are valid options.  They may be shortened to one character but
may not be combined.

@table @code
@item -all
List all currently defined symbols.

@item -builtins
List built-in variables and functions.  This includes all currently
compiled function files, but does not include all function files that
are in the @code{LOADPATH}.

@item -functions
List user-defined functions.

@item -long
Print a long listing including the type and dimensions of any symbols.
The symbols in the first column of output indicate whether it is
possible to redefine the symbol, and whether it is possible for it to be
cleared.

@item -variables
List user-defined variables.
@end table

Valid patterns are the same as described for the @code{clear} command
above.  If no patterns are supplied, all symbols from the given category
are listed.  By default, only user defined functions and variables
visible in the local scope are displayed.

The command @code{whos} is equivalent to @code{who -long}.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} exist (@var{name})
Return 1 if the name exists as a variable, and 2 if the name (after
appending @samp{.m}) is a function file in the path.  Otherwise, return
0.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} error (@var{msg})
Print the message @var{msg}, prefixed by the string @samp{error: }, and
set Octave's internal error state such that control will return to the
top level without evaluating any more commands.  This is useful for
aborting from functions.

If @var{msg} does not end with a new line character, Octave will print a
traceback of all the function calls leading to the error.  For example,

@example
function f () g () end
function g () h () end
function h () nargin == 1 || error ("nargin != 1"); end
f ()
error: nargin != 1
error: evaluating index expression near line 1, column 30
error: evaluating binary operator `||' near line 1, column 27
error: called from `h'
error: called from `g'
error: called from `f'
@end example

@noindent
produces a list of messages that can help you to quickly locate the
exact location of the error.

If @var{msg} ends in a new line character, Octave will only print
@var{msg} and will not display any traceback messages as it returns
control to the top level.  For example, modifying the error message
in the previous example to end in a new line causes Octave to only print
a single message:

@example
function h () nargin == 1 || error ("nargin != 1\n"); end
f ()
error: nargin != 1
@end example
@end deftypefn

@defvr {Built-in Variable} error_text
@end defvr

@defvr {Built-in Variable} beep_on_error
If the value of @code{beep_on_error} is nonzero, Octave will try
to ring your terminal's bell before printing an error message.  The
default value is 0.
@end defvr

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} warning (@var{msg})
Print the message @var{msg} prefixed by the string @samp{warning: }.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} usage (@var{msg})
Print the message @var{msg}, prefixed by the string @samp{usage: }, and
set Octave's internal error state such that control will return to the
top level without evaluating any more commands.  This is useful for
aborting from functions.

After @code{usage} is evaluated, Octave will print a traceback of all
the function calls leading to the usage message.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} perror (@var{name}, @var{num})
Print the error message for function @var{name} corresponding to the
error number @var{num}.  This function is intended to be used to print
useful error messages for those functions that return numeric error
codes.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} menu (@var{title}, @var{opt1}, @dots{})
Print a title string followed by a series of options.  Each option will
be printed along with a number.  The return value is the number of the
option selected by the user.  This function is useful for interactive
programs.  There is no limit to the number of options that may be passed
in, but it may be confusing to present more than will fit easily on one
screen.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} document (@var{symbol}, @var{text})
Set the documentation string for @var{symbol} to @var{text}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} file_in_path (@var{path}, @var{file})
Return the absolute name name of @var{file} if it can be found in
@var{path}.  The value of @var{path} should be a colon-separated list of
directories in the format described for the built-in variable
@code{LOADPATH}.

If the file cannot be found in the path, an empty matrix is returned.
For example,

@example
octave:13> file_in_path (LOADPATH, "nargchk.m")
ans = /usr/local/lib/octave/1.1.0/m/general/nargchk.m
@end example
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} completion_matches (@var{hint})
Generate possible completions given @var{hint}.

This function is provided for the benefit of programs like Emacs which
might be controlling Octave and handling user input.  The current
command number is not incremented when this function is called.  This is
a feature, not a bug.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function File} {} nargchk (@var{nargin_min}, @var{nargin_max}, @var{n})
If @var{n} is in the range @var{nargin_min} through @var{nargin_max}
inclusive, return the empty matrix.  Otherwise, return a message
indicating whether @var{n} is too large or too small.

This is useful for checking to see that the number of arguments supplied
to a function is within an acceptable range.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} {} octave_tmp_file_name ()
Return a unique temporary file name.

Since the named file is not opened, by @code{octave_tmp_file_name}, it
is possible (though relatively unlikely) that it will not be available
by the time your program attempts to open it.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Command} type name @dots{}
@deffnx {Command} type [-q] name @dots{}
Display the definition of each @var{name} that refers to a function.

Normally also displays if each @var{name} is user-defined or builtin;
the @code{-q} option suppresses this behaviour.

Currently, Octave can only display functions that can be compiled
cleanly, because it uses its internal representation of the function to
recreate the program text.

Comments are not displayed because Octave's parser currently discards
them as it converts the text of a function file to its internal
representation.  This problem may be fixed in a future release.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} which name @dots{}
Display the type of each @var{name}.  If @var{name} is defined from a
function file, the full name of the file is also displayed.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {Built-in Function} octave_config_info ()
Return a structure containing configuration and installation
information.
@end deftypefn
